docs(MADR): targeting all gateways in policy (#8829)
kumahq/kuma: docs/madr/decisions/037-configure-all-gateways.md

# Configuring many gateways

- Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

This document aims to clarify how to configure all gateways or a subset of them, especially when adjustments, such as in `MeshTimeout`, are needed compared to regular Mesh traffic.

## Decision Drivers

- When we set up default rules, we want to use different settings for gateways than we do for regular Mesh applications.

## Considered Options

- Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSuperset`
- Add label to all gateways and target them by kind `MeshSubset`
- Remove requirement of `name` when using kind `MeshGateway`
- Use internal tag `gateways: include/exclude/only` when using with `MeshSubset`

> - Add a new field to targetRef `gateways: include/exclude/only`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a new field to targetRef `proxyTypes: ["Sidecar", "Gateway"]`
```

## Decision Outcome

> - Add a new field to targetRef `gateways: include/exclude/only`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a new field to targetRef `proxyTypes: ["Sidecar", "Gateway"`
```

- Change of the current api
- Problem with ordering when there is more specific policy with the same kind but with name defined

## Use internal tag `gateways: include/exclude/only` when using with `MeshSubset

We can implement a code change that checks if a policy has the tag `gateway`. If the tag is present, we evaluate one of three possible values: `include`, `exclude`, or `only`. If the value of the tag doesn't match any of these possibilities, we use the actual tag value. If the tag is not defined, we consider it as the default value `include`.

```yaml
targetRef:
  kind: MeshSubset
  tags:
    gateways: "only"
```

### Positive Consequences

- Users can set things up for all gateways.
- No need for a new Kind.
- Not confusing names

### Negative Consequences

- Configuration is not so obvious
- What about merging `MeshSubset`'s
- Can break current behavior if the user has already defined the tag

## Add a new field to targetRef `proxyTypes: [sidecar, gateway]`

We can add a new field `proxyTypes` to targetRef which allows to apply policy to: 
* only gateways
* all dataplanes including gateways
* all dataplanes excluding gateways

```yaml
targetRef:
  kind: Mesh|MeshSubset

>   proxyTypes: ["sidecar", "gateway"]

Reviewer 2: PascalCase :)
```suggestion
  proxyTypes: ["Sidecar", "Gateway"]
```

```
When field is not defined or empty we assume that the user wants to apply configuration to all sidecar, not gateways. 

> In this situtation we won't break current behaviour. Also, worth mentioning that `proxyTypes` can only be set when 

Reviewer 2: Hmm, but today `kind: Mesh` means both gateways and sidecars, no?

Author: Yes, I think I forgot to update it. Let me fix

# Configuring many gateways

- Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

This document aims to clarify how to configure all gateways or a subset of them, especially when adjustments, such as in `MeshTimeout`, are needed compared to regular Mesh traffic.

## Decision Drivers

- When we set up default rules, we want to use different settings for gateways than we do for regular Mesh applications.

## Considered Options

- Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`
- Add label to all gateways and target them by kind `MeshSubset`

## Decision Outcome

- ?

## Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`

We can introduce a new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset` It only picks gateways based on tags, if you provide tags. But, it can't pick a specific gateway by name.

```yaml
targetRef:
  kind: MeshGatewaysSubset
  tags: {} # not required
```

> Thanks to this we can allow users to target all gateways and apply some good default configuration for them.

Reviewer 3: I think we can add a note that this will have to match either only an entire gateway, i.e. ignoring listener tags OR can match specific listeners, depending on the policy.

# Configuring many gateways

- Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

This document aims to clarify how to configure all gateways or a subset of them, especially when adjustments, such as in `MeshTimeout`, are needed compared to regular Mesh traffic.

## Decision Drivers

- When we set up default rules, we want to use different settings for gateways than we do for regular Mesh applications.

## Considered Options

> - Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`

Reviewer 4: Should be MeshGatewaySubset

# Configuring many gateways

- Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

This document aims to clarify how to configure all gateways or a subset of them, especially when adjustments, such as in `MeshTimeout`, are needed compared to regular Mesh traffic.

## Decision Drivers

- When we set up default rules, we want to use different settings for gateways than we do for regular Mesh applications.

## Considered Options

- Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`
- Add label to all gateways and target them by kind `MeshSubset`

## Decision Outcome

- ?

## Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`

We can introduce a new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset` It only picks gateways based on tags, if you provide tags. But, it can't pick a specific gateway by name.

```yaml
targetRef:
  kind: MeshGatewaysSubset

>   tags: {} # not required

Reviewer 4: Please just add a note that no tags means any gateway :)

# Configuring many gateways

- Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

This document aims to clarify how to configure all gateways or a subset of them, especially when adjustments, such as in `MeshTimeout`, are needed compared to regular Mesh traffic.

## Decision Drivers

- When we set up default rules, we want to use different settings for gateways than we do for regular Mesh applications.

## Considered Options

- Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`
- Add label to all gateways and target them by kind `MeshSubset`

## Decision Outcome

- ?

> ## Introduce new kind `MeshGatewaysSubset`

Author: The naming of this kind is a bit confusing but hard to find other name
- MeshGatewaysSubset - Subset of all gateways
- MeshGateway - specific gateway by name
- MeshGateways - all gateways, but it's too similar to MeshGateway
- others?

Another option could be to introduce an additional field in a `targetRef` object but it just moves functionality of kind outside so I don't think this is a good option.

Reviewer 2: MeshGatewaySuperset :) i.e. if we want to select all MeshServices we can add `MeshServiceSuperset`

Reviewer 3: Hmm true, or actually just `MeshGatewaySet` right?

Reviewer 2: TBH I'd prefer `...Superset`, there are definitions in Wiki on "superset/subset" and it seems more clear we're trying to oppose "superset" to "subset". While if you're reading `...Set` it doesn't tell you much on its own
